README.md, before:

# Development Expert, Fall 2019

This course is the finalizing technical / coding course at Devine. We'll teach you the basic principles and frameworks to get started with alternative ways of interaction (aka non keyboard / mouse interaction).

You'll get 4 weeks of new topics (Arduino, WebGL, Communication and AI), followed by a hackathon and a 5 week passion project.

## Week 1 Arduino

Get basic knowledge of electrical circuits. Program basic Arduino sketches, interacting with different inputs and outputs. Leverage javascript applications using firmata with Johnny Five and Electron JS.

## Week 2 WebGL

Build your own, custom shader for 2D on the web. Learn the basic principles behind a 3D engine, and get your hands dirty with ThreeJS in your javascript application.

## Week 3 Communication

Learn about networking and socket communication. Build client and server side socket logic using socket.io. Share webcam and microphone feeds over the internet using the WebRTC spec.

## Week 4 Artificial Intelligence

What is AI / Machine Learning / Neural networks? How does a neural network work? Use existing models with ml5.js and RunwayML.

## Week 5 Hackathon

Build an interactive experience in one week using the knowledge from the past weeks. Present your installation at a community event.

## Week 6 Concept Pitches

Pitch your ideas for your final personal project you'll be working on during the second half of the semester

Commit message:

added links to week01 and week02 to main README

README.md, after:

# Development Expert, Fall 2019

This course is the finalizing technical / coding course at Devine. We'll teach you the basic principles and frameworks to get started with alternative ways of interaction (aka non keyboard / mouse interaction).

You'll get 4 weeks of new topics (Arduino, WebGL, Communication and AI), followed by a hackathon and a 5 week passion project.

## Week 1 Arduino

Get basic knowledge of electrical circuits. Program basic Arduino sketches, interacting with different inputs and outputs. Leverage javascript applications using firmata with Johnny Five and Electron JS.

[Continue to Week 1 - Arduino](week01-arduino/)

## Week 2 WebGL

Build your own, custom shader for 2D on the web. Learn the basic principles behind a 3D engine, and get your hands dirty with ThreeJS in your javascript application.

[Continue to Week 2 - WebGL](week02-webgl/)

## Week 3 Communication

Learn about networking and socket communication. Build client and server side socket logic using socket.io. Share webcam and microphone feeds over the internet using the WebRTC spec.

## Week 4 Artificial Intelligence

What is AI / Machine Learning / Neural networks? How does a neural network work? Use existing models with ml5.js and RunwayML.

## Week 5 Hackathon

Build an interactive experience in one week using the knowledge from the past weeks. Present your installation at a community event.

## Week 6 Concept Pitches

Pitch your ideas for your final personal project you'll be working on during the second half of the semester
